

looks like the dates for this grant which is an R01 research grant are:

Cycle 1: Feb 5th
Cycle 2: June 5th
Cycle 3: Oct 5th




On page called PHS 398 Research Plan there are the following sections:



Specific Aims
-------------

To produce a genome viewer with a display speed comparable to current high
speed computer games such as car racing programs.

To show that such a viewer will significantly increase the effectiveness of
curation and annotation of genomes with particular reference to the display of:

	   - variation in its many forms

	   - the huge volume of data produced by new sequencing technology

To use the substantially faster performance to investigate new ways to show
sequence data to improve and speed up annotation.



Background and Significance
---------------------------

Current genome viewers are either quite low performance because they are
web-based or even when coded in efficient languages such as C or C++ are some
way behind gaming software because they do not make use of the graphics
hardware to be found on even modest desktop machines. This is a problem becuase
of two different but related developments:

	- the amount of alignment data in the form of nuclotide and peptide
	matches is increasing extremely rapidly meaning that current browsers
	are becoming unwieldy.  This problem will increase many-fold when the
	full flow of the new sequencing technologies goes into production and
	enters the annotation process.

	- The improvement in throughput of sequencing technologies is making it
	possible to compare variation between and within species but this
	requires the display of much larger amounts of data.

Exploiting the graphics hardware traditionally requires use of esoteric
software toolkits mostly only available to gaming enthusiasts, recently however
a number of Open Source toolkits have emerged (e.g. Clutter) which provide more
straight forward access to the hardware. They provide well supported and
portable toolkits which largely shield the programmer from the intricacies of
the hardware.



Preliminary Studies
-------------------

An analysis of three common open source conventional toolkits for writing
graphical applications shows that their performance while good cannot
realistically be significantly improved (USE ROYS ASSESSMENT OF FOOCANVAS,
GOOCANVAS AND THE OTHER ONE...). Generally to get good reactivity means drawing
a large number of features up front so that subsequent
scrolling/panning/zooming works well. This means a sometimes substantial delay
because the drawing calls cause a bottleneck and also uses substantial amounts
of memory. Features simply cannot be drawn fast enough on the fly to avoid
this.

Gaming software takes a different approach and objects must be drawn in real
time _as_ the user scrolls/pans/zooms. This is possible because the game
software makes good use of the graphics hardware. Where such hardware
assistance is either disabled or is not available gaming programs are not much
faster than normal graphics programs.



Research Design and Methods
---------------------------

The research will be conducted in the following phases:


1) Software/hardware performance, reliability, usability assessment

A set of standard drawing tests will be designed and used for assessment.  This
will include testing several different flavours of hardware to ensure that the
software is stable and its performance dependable.


2) Prototype viewers

Different viewing modes wil be implemented as prototypes to assess with the
help of annotators their use and speed.



3) Viewer development

The most useful prototype(s) will be taken forward for development to the level
where it can be used in the Sanger Institues annoation system.




